# Adolescent.polysubstance.initiation
Code for analyses reported in “Genetic liability, environmental adversity, and brain development predict adolescent polysubstance use initiation.”

To examine whether PSU identifies youth at ultra-high risk for psychopathology, linear mixed-effects models (LMMs) were used to examine associations from lifetime substance use to the CBCL total problems at each time point. Age, sex, pubertal stage, income-to-needs ratio (INR, a global measure of socioeconomic status), and genetic ancestry were included as fixed-effect covariates, and family ID and enrollment site were modeled as random effects to account for within-individual, familial, and site-level variability. LMMs were also used to examine associations from PRSSUD to FC, adjusting for the same covariates as well as mean FD to account for image quality, and using the same random effects along with scanner manufacturer to account for inter-scanner variability.

Generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) with binomial error structure and logit link function were used to examine associations between lifetime substance use and (a) six PRSs, (b) 88 environmental exposures, and (c) FC measures at each time point, adjusting for the same covariates and random effects as previously described. The PRS analysis was additionally stratified by genetic ancestry group, while the environmental and FC analyses adjusted for genetic ancestry as a covariate. Additional ancestry-stratified models were fit to assess PRSSUD-by-environment interactions on lifetime substance use, by defining a binary PRSSUD variable that classified participants into a high-genetic-risk group (top 25th percentile of PRSSUD) and low-genetic-risk group (bottom 75th percentile of PRSSUD) levels within each ancestry group following previous studies24,25, also adding PRS × covariate and environment × covariate interactions to reduce spurious genome-wide signals51. 

Finally, Cox proportional hazards models were used to examine associations between PRS, environment, and baseline FC and time to substance use initiation. Models were fit separately for time to transition from NSU to PSU (or SSU) initiation, and time from SSU to PSU initiation, adjusting for age, sex, pubertal stage, and INR, and random effects for family and site. As before, the PRS model was stratified by ancestry group, while environment analyses additionally adjusted for ancestry group, and FC analyses further adjusted for ancestry group, mean FD, and scanner.

For all analyses, covariates were aligned with the assessment time of independent variables, and numeric variables were standardized. Standardized coefficients (β) and associated two-tailed p-values from LMMs for continuous outcomes, adjusted odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) from GLMMs for binary variables, and hazards ratios (HRs) with 95% CIs from Cox proportional hazards models were reported. False discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 was used to declare significant findings for multiple comparisons across 7 time points for CBCL total problems, 3 × 6 PRS associations (ancestry-by-PRS), 88 environmental exposures, and 247 subcortical-cortical connections, respectively.

The above codes were tested on R (version 4.4.0) with the lmerTest, glmmTMB, and coxme packages in Windows system. All required packages have been specified in the codes. No specific installation is required but only downloading and importing these codes to R.
